Blog: FlowFuse Forms: Easy Data Collection for Your Factory Floor (#3255)
FlowFuse/website: src/blog/2025/06/flowfuse-forms-easy-data-collection-factory-floor.md

---
title: "FlowFuse Forms: Easy Data Collection for Your Factory Floor"
subtitle: Get Shop Floor Data Directly to Machine Settings
description: Learn how to create and configure forms in FlowFuse Dashboard to collect data efficiently in industrial applications using Node-RED.
date: 2025-06-09
authors: ["sumit-shinde"]
image: /blog/2025/06/images/building-forms-in-flowfuse.png
keywords: flowfuse form, node-red form, Recipe Management System, Node-RED Recipe Management, FlowFuse Recipe Management System
tags:
   - flowfuse
---

> It's often a pain to get important data from the factory floor. Things like updating recipes, doing quality checks, or setting up machines still rely on old methods – manual notes, slow spreadsheets. This can lead to delays, errors, and a lot of wasted time before anyone can actually use the information. It's especially tough when you need quick feedback from an operator or a specific setting to go straight to a machine.

Reviewer: "updating recipes" not clear on the context of "recipes" here.

<!--more-->

> This post will show you a better way. We'll look at how FlowFuse Forms on the FlowFuse Dashboard can make collecting factory data much simpler. You'll learn how to build useful forms that connect what your team knows directly to your industrial processes. We'll even walk through a example for digitizing machine recipe updates, showing you how to build this solution yourself, step-by-step, which will include everything we learned so far about form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article will show you an easy way to gather data via a form entry. We'll look at how forms in FlowFuse Dashboard can make collecting factory data much simpler. You'll learn how to build useful forms that connects your team's knowledge directly to your industrial processes. We'll even walk through a example for digitizing machine recipe updates, showing you how to build this solution yourself, step-by-step.
```

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, make sure you have the following:

> - **Running FlowFuse Instance:** Make sure you have a FlowFuse instance set up and running. If you don't have an account, check out our [free trial](https://app.flowfuse.com/account/create).

Reviewer: They're not running a "FlowFuse Instance" - that's the whole platform. They need a copy of Node-RED. 

```suggestion
- **Node-RED:** Make sure you have an instance of Node-RED up and running. The quickest way to do this is via. If you don't have an account, check out our [free trial](https://app.flowfuse.com/account/create).
```

> - **FlowFuse Dashboard:** Ensure you have [FlowFuse Dashboard](https://flows.nodered.org/node/@flowfuse/node-red-dashboard) (also known as Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 in the community) installed and properly configured on your instance.
> - **SQLite Contrib Node:** Install the [node-red-node-sqlite](https://flows.nodered.org/node/node-red-node-sqlite) package, which will be used in the practical example.

Reviewer: I'd put a sentence in here instead to split rhe core need for Node-RED from the 3rd party nodes.

```suggestion
Then you'll need to add two more sets of nodes to your palette:

- **FlowFuse Dashboard:** Ensure you have [FlowFuse Dashboard](https://flows.nodered.org/node/@flowfuse/node-red-dashboard) (also known as Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 in the community) installed and properly configured on your instance.
- **SQLite:** Install the [node-red-node-sqlite](https://flows.nodered.org/node/node-red-node-sqlite) package, which will be used in the practical example.
```

> - **Basic Node-RED Knowledge:** You are familiar with creating and deploying basic flows in Node-RED. If not, consider taking the [Node-RED Fundamentals Course](https://node-red-academy.learnworlds.com/course/node-red-getting-started) *sponsored by FlowFuse.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and finally:

- **Basic Node-RED Knowledge:** You are familiar with creating and deploying basic flows in Node-RED. If not, consider taking the [Node-RED Fundamentals Course](https://node-red-academy.learnworlds.com/course/node-red-getting-started) *sponsored by FlowFuse.*
```

## Building Forms in FlowFuse Dashboard

> The FlowFuse Dashboard makes it easy to build interactive industrial applications using drag-and-drop components—no coding required. One of these components is the [ui_form](https://dashboard.flowfuse.com/nodes/widgets/ui-form.html) widget, which allows you to create versatile forms within your application. The ui_form widget supports a wide range of input types, including text fields, number inputs, date pickers, multi-line text areas, dropdowns, and checkboxes. A key benefit of this widget is that you can configure the form fields either statically (with predefined values) or dynamically (updated through your Node-RED flow), depending on your application’s needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The FlowFuse Dashboard makes it easy to build interactive industrial applications using drag-and-drop components — **no coding required**. 

One of these components is the [Form](https://dashboard.flowfuse.com/nodes/widgets/ui-form.html) widget, which allows you to create versatile forms within your applications. The Form widget supports a wide range of input types, including:

- Text Fields
- Number Inputs
- Date Pickers,
- Multi-line Text Areas
- Dropdown Selection
- Checkboxes

A key benefit of this widget is that you can configure the form fields either statically (with predefined values) or dynamically (updated through your Node-RED flow), depending on your application’s needs.
```

> To get started with building a form, follow these steps to add and configure the **ui_form** widget in your FlowFuse Dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Adding and Configuring the Form Widget

> 1. Drag the **ui_form** widget onto the canvas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Drag the **Form** widget onto the canvas.
```

> 2. Double-click on the widget and create a new group for it with the correct page configuration to render it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Double-click on the widget and create a new group for it with the correct page configuration to render it. (note: if this is the first widget you have, this will automatically be created for you)
```

> 3. Set the correct size (width and height) according to your preferences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Set an appropriate size (width and height) according to your preferences.
```

4. Enter the label for the form.

Now that we have completed all the basic and necessary configurations for the form, let’s add the input elements.

### Adding Input Fields to the Form Statically

> The `ui_form` widget supports various input element types that can be tailored to specific use cases — from collecting simple text to selecting dates or choosing from predefined options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The widget supports various input element types that can be tailored to specific use cases — from collecting simple text to selecting dates or choosing from predefined options.
```

**To add input elements:**

1. Click the **+ add** button in the widget’s configuration dialog.
2. A new configuration row will appear for the element.
3. Configure each input element with the following fields:

- **Label**: This is the visible label for the field shown to the user.
- **Name**: A unique key used in the message payload (e.g., `msg.payload.firstname`) when the form is submitted.
- **Type**: Select the input type. Supported types include:
  - **Text**: For short text inputs (e.g., name, city).
  - **Number**: For numeric inputs (e.g., age, price).
  - **Date**: For selecting a date.
  - **Text Area**: For longer free-form text.
  - **Dropdown**: For selecting from a list of predefined values.  
    _We will cover how to add options to the dropdown field in a later section._
  - **Checkbox**: For boolean values (checked or unchecked).
- **Required**: Check this box to make the field mandatory. The form cannot be submitted unless this field is filled.
- **Row**:: If Multiline is selected, this defines the number of visible rows in the text area.

> ![Adding Form Elements](./images/adding-form-element.gif){data-zoomable}

Reviewer: move this to the first thing below the "Adding Input Fields to the Form Statically" headline. It shows how easy it is, and the text can be intimidating.

_Adding Form Elements_]

### Adding Options to Dropdown Inputs Statically

> When you add Dropdown type input element to the **ui_form** widget, you need to provide a list of options that the user can choose from. These options can be configured in the **ui_form** widget's configuration dialog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you add Dropdown type input element to the Form widget, you need to provide a list of `options` that the user can choose from. These options can be configured in the widget's configuration dialog.
```

> **To add static options:**
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 1. In the **ui_form** widget's configuration dialog, switch to the Dropdown Options tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the widget's configuration dialog, switch to the "Dropdown Options" tab.
```

2. Click the **+ add** button to insert a new option row.
3. In the new row, fill in the following fields:
   - **Dropdown**: Select the dropdown input field you want to add options to.
   - **Value**: The internal value that will be sent in the form payload when this option is selected.
   - **Label**: The visible text shown to the user in the dropdown list.

Repeat this process for each option you want to add.

> ### Pre-filling Forms: Setting Default Values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Pre-filling Forms with Default Values
```

> You can pre-fill forms with default values to streamline user input, reduce typing errors, and save time. This is especially useful in scenarios like editing an existing recipe, where the current details can be loaded directly into the form.

Reviewer: The term "recipe" is out of place here

> The **ui_form** widget supports setting these default values dynamically. To do this, send a `msg.payload` object to the input of the **ui_form** node, where each key corresponds to a form field and its value represents the pre-filled data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can pass data to the `ui-form` node in our flow to set these values dynamically. To do this, send an object in `msg.payload` to the input of the relevant node. Each key of `msg.payload` corresponds to a form field and its value represents the pre-filled data.
```

> For example, if your form includes fields for `product_name` and `target_temperature_c`, you can send a message like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if your form includes fields for `product_name` and `target_temperature_c`, you can send a `msg.payload` like this:
```

];

// Output 1: For the ui_dropdown node (msg.options)
let msg1 = { options: dropdownOptions }; 

// Output 2: For the ui_form node (msg.ui_update.options)
let msg2 = { ui_update: { options: formElements } };

return [msg1, msg2]; // Send two separate messages
```

4. Drag a **ui_dropdown** node onto the canvas. Configure its dashboard group and label (Select Recipe ID:). Ensure its "Options" list is empty, as it will be populated dynamically. Connect the first output of the "Generate Form & Dropdown Definition" **function** to the input of this **ui_dropdown** node.

5. Drag a **ui_form** widget onto the canvas. Configure its dashboard group and label (Recipe Parameters). Crucially, leave its "Options" list completely empty in its properties. Set the "Submit" button text to Apply and "Cancel" to Clear.  Connect the second output of the "Generate Form & Dropdown Definition" **function** to the input of this **ui_form** node.

6. Deploy your flow and open the dashboard. You should now see your form with the "Select Recipe" dropdown populated.

### Populate Form on Recipe Selection**

> This flow segment pre-fills the ui_form with recipe details when an operator selects a recipe from the dropdown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This flow segment pre-fills the form with recipe details when an operator selects a recipe from the dropdown.
```

   - `msg.params.$recipe_id` to `msg.payload.recipe_id`

4. Connect the **sqlite** node's output to a **function** node. Name it Show values to form fields. This function will format the retrieved recipe details to pre-fill the form.

```javascript
let recipeDetails = msg.payload[0]; // Get the first (and only) result

if (recipeDetails) {
    // Map recipe details to the keys of your form elements for pre-filling.
    msg.payload = {
        recipe_id_display: recipeDetails.recipe_id, // For the display field in ui_form
        product_name: recipeDetails.product_name,
        version_no: recipeDetails.version_no,
        target_temperature_c: recipeDetails.target_temperature_c,
        mixing_speed_rpm: recipeDetails.mixing_speed_rpm,
        pressure_bar: recipeDetails.pressure_bar,
        material_a_kg: recipeDetails.material_a_kg,
        material_b_kg: recipeDetails.material_b_kg,
        catalyst_ml: recipeDetails.catalyst_ml,
        hold_time_min: recipeDetails.hold_time_min,
        description: recipeDetails.description
    };
} else {
    // If selection is cleared, prepare an empty payload (except for selected_recipe_id)
    msg.payload = {}; 
}
return msg;
```

> 5. Connect the output of the Show values to form fields **function** node back to the input of your **ui_form** widget (from Step 2).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Connect the output of the Show values to form fields **function** node back to the input of your form widget (from Step 2).
```

### Handle Form Submission & Update Database**

This flow segment processes the data when the operator clicks the "Apply" button, updating the recipe in your database and providing feedback.

> 1. Connect a new wire from the main output of your **ui_form** widget. This output fires when the form is submitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Connect a new wire from the main output of your **ui-form** widget. This output fires when the form is submitted.
```

> 2. Connect the **ui_form** output to a **change** node. Name it Prepare Update Params. This node will prepare the `msg.params` object for the SQLite update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Connect the form's output to a **change** node. Name it Prepare Update Params. This node will prepare the `msg.params` object for the SQLite update.
```

- Rules:
   - set `msg.params` to JSON `{}`.
   - set `msg.params.$recipe_id` to `flow.selected_recipe_id`.

For each editable field in your form (e.g., target_temperature_c, mixing_speed_rpm), add a rule: set `msg.params.$[FIELD_NAME] to msg.payload.[FIELD_NAME]`.

3. Connect the **change** node to an **sqlite** node.
   - Configure it for your database, set SQL Query to prepared statement.
   - Paste your UPDATE SQL query into the "Prepared Statement" field, using the $parameters that match your msg.params.

4. Connect the **sqlite** node's output to a **switch** node. Name it Check for Update Success.

- Set Property to payload and Rules to is empty.
- Add 1 output.

5. Connect the **switch** node's output to a **change** node. Name it Success Message.
- Set `msg.payload` to str "Recipe updated successfully".

> 6. Connect the **change** node to a **ui_notification** node to display the success message on the dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Connect the **change** node to a **ui-notification** node to display the success message on the dashboard.
```
